analysis.md, before:

Analysis of Coevolution Dataset
================
Fiel Dimayacyac

## Summary of Data Set

The data set analyzed in this repository is taken from an analysis of
related genes in a set of RNA-seq data across 18 species of fungi \[1\].
The repository containing the original analysis can be found
[here](https://github.com/acope3/GeneExpression_coevolution). Across
these 18 species, 3556 homologous proteins were analyzed for coevolution
of their expression levels using a multivariate Brownian Motion model.
From this analysis, the researchers concluded that certain proteins that
physically interact show evidence of coevolution, and that PCMs are
uniquely suited to detect this evolution \[1\]. In this analysis, I will
reanalyze the methods they used to come to their conclusions and
determine if the a BM model is appropriate for the given data set.

## Methods

I will first conduct a relative fit analysis via Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) \[2\] to compare, in a relative sense, how well the data
fits the chosen model against alternative models. These models being
Early Burst (EB)\[3\] and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)\[4\]. Next, I will
perform an adequacy analysis of their chosen model for their data using
the program arbutus \[5\]. Finally, I will analyze the adequacy of the
“best fit” model chosen by the relative fit test mentioned above.

## Results

Analysis of the best model out of a set of BM, OU, and EB shows that the
OU model can account for a majority of the data set, as shown by the
plot below.

![](AIC.png "Histogram for the best-fit model for a particular gene")

**Figure 1: Histogram showing the best-fit model for each gene-phylogeny
pair.** Around 2500 of the genes showed a lowest AIC value for OU, while
around 1000 showed a lowest AIC value for BM, with only a handful seemed
best-fit for the EB model. This suggests that the OU model best
describes most of the data compared to the other two.

However, the researchers did acknowledge that the OU model may have been
a better fit overall for much of the data, but that a BM model would be
adequate “enough” to describe the data due to the low number of tips
present in the phylogenetic tree. To test this, I then used Arbutus to
determine the adequacy of a pure BM model for the data, shown below.

![](arbutus_BM.png)

**Figure 2. P-value distributions for each of the six test statistics
when fitting data to BM model.** The test statistics, besides m.sig and
d.cdf, display a sharp increase in count around the low end of p-values.
This suggests that the data do not belong to the same distribution as
one would expect based off of the phylogeny. Essentially, the BM model
is not adequately suited to explain this data.

As shown in the plot above, a BM model was not adequate for this data
set, as evidenced by the high amount of low p-values across the board
for four out of the five test statistics measured (not including m.sig).
Because the data set could not adequately be explained by the BM model,
it is possible that the inferences drawn from their analysis do not hold
up to scrutiny and re-analysis. I then compared this to an analysis of
the data set but fitting the best-fit model according to the previous
relative fit test.

![](arbutus_results.png)

**Figure 3. P-value distributions for each of the six test statistics
when fitting data to the best fit model.** The test statistics, besides
m.sig, display a uniform distribution of p-values. This suggests that
the data is adequately explained by the corresponding model. S.hgt shows
a low amount of p-values near the lower end of values.

Interestingly, when fitting the best available model to each gene, the
models used were adequate across the board, as shown by the flat
distribution of p-values. Notably, the s.hgt test statistic shows a low
amount of p-values near the low end. This is likely caused by many of
the genes having NA values for this test statistic. This means that the
re-scaled tree for each of these genes has a conal shape, i.e., there
was no phylogenetic signal for these genes when the best-fit model is
used. The fact that this was not seen when fitting the BM model alone
suggests that other models (EB or OU) may be too stringent with
phylogenetic signal, or that the BM model is not stringent enough.
Further analysis is necessary to determine which of the two
possibilities explains this.

The authors of the paper also chose to exclude many of the genes that
did not meet the assumptions of the BM model, leaving a total of 648
genes left for analysis. The plot below shows the same process as above,
but for just those 648 genes. Additionally, I have calculated a standard
error for each gene across species and used that in the fit of each
model.

![](arbutus_only_BM_genes.png)

**Figure 4. P-value distributions for just the 648 genes that fit the
assumptions of the BM model when fit to a BM model.** The distribution
shows the same trend as Figure 2.

![](only_BM_allfit_AIC.png)

**Figure 5. Histogram showing the fit best-fit model for a
gene-phylogeny pair for just genes that fit the assumptions of BM.** The
trend is the same as Figure 1.

![](only_BM_allfit_arbutus_results.png)

**Figure 6. P-value distributions for just the 648 genes that fit the
assumptions of the BM model when fit to the best-fit model.** The trend
remains the same as in Figure 3, except for the coefficient of
variation, which accounts for rate variation across the phylogeny, which
actually shows a lower adequacy for this subset of the data.

As stated earlier, a set of the genes have low phylogenetic signal when
fitting the best-fit model, as shown by the genes that are missing
values for s.hgt. An analysis of these genes…

## References

1.  Cope, A. L.; O’Meara, B. C.; Gilchrist, M. A. Gene Expression of
    Functionally-Related Genes Coevolves across Fungal Species:
    Detecting Coevolution of Gene Expression Using Phylogenetic
    Comparative Methods. *BMC Genomics* **2020**, *21* (1), 370.
    <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-6761-3.>
2.  Akaike, H.; Petrov, B. N.; Csaki, F. *Second International Symposium
    on Information Theory*; Akademia Kiado, 1973.
3.  Simpson, G. G. *Tempo and Mode in Evolution*; Columbia Univ. Press:
    New York, 1944.
4.  Hansen, T. F. Stabilizing Selection and the Comparative Analysis of
    Adaptation. *Evolution* **1997**, *51* (5), 1341–1351.
    <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.1997.tb01457.x.>
5.  Pennell, M. W.; FitzJohn, R. G.; Cornwell, W. K.; Harmon, L. J.
    Model Adequacy and the Macroevolution of Angiosperm Functional
    Traits. *The American Naturalist* **2015**, *186* (2), E33–E50.
    <https://doi.org/10.1086/682022.>

Commit message:

First phylogenetic significance test, on just the BM genes.

analysis.md, after:

Analysis of Coevolution Dataset
================
Fiel Dimayacyac

## Summary of Data Set

The data set analyzed in this repository is taken from an analysis of
related genes in a set of RNA-seq data across 18 species of fungi \[1\].
The repository containing the original analysis can be found
[here](https://github.com/acope3/GeneExpression_coevolution). Across
these 18 species, 3556 homologous proteins were analyzed for coevolution
of their expression levels using a multivariate Brownian Motion model.
From this analysis, the researchers concluded that certain proteins that
physically interact show evidence of coevolution, and that PCMs are
uniquely suited to detect this evolution \[1\]. In this analysis, I will
reanalyze the methods they used to come to their conclusions and
determine if the a BM model is appropriate for the given data set.

## Methods

I will first conduct a relative fit analysis via Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) \[2\] to compare, in a relative sense, how well the data
fits the chosen model against alternative models. These models being
Early Burst (EB)\[3\] and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)\[4\]. Next, I will
perform an adequacy analysis of their chosen model for their data using
the program arbutus \[5\]. Finally, I will analyze the adequacy of the
“best fit” model chosen by the relative fit test mentioned above.

## Results

Analysis of the best model out of a set of BM, OU, and EB shows that the
OU model can account for a majority of the data set, as shown by the
plot below.

![](AIC.png "Histogram for the best-fit model for a particular gene")

**Figure 1: Histogram showing the best-fit model for each gene-phylogeny
pair.** Around 2500 of the genes showed a lowest AIC value for OU, while
around 1000 showed a lowest AIC value for BM, with only a handful seemed
best-fit for the EB model. This suggests that the OU model best
describes most of the data compared to the other two.

However, the researchers did acknowledge that the OU model may have been
a better fit overall for much of the data, but that a BM model would be
adequate “enough” to describe the data due to the low number of tips
present in the phylogenetic tree. To test this, I then used Arbutus to
determine the adequacy of a pure BM model for the data, shown below.

![](arbutus_BM.png)

**Figure 2. P-value distributions for each of the six test statistics
when fitting data to BM model.** The test statistics, besides m.sig and
d.cdf, display a sharp increase in count around the low end of p-values.
This suggests that the data do not belong to the same distribution as
one would expect based off of the phylogeny. Essentially, the BM model
is not adequately suited to explain this data.

As shown in the plot above, a BM model was not adequate for this data
set, as evidenced by the high amount of low p-values across the board
for four out of the five test statistics measured (not including m.sig).
Because the data set could not adequately be explained by the BM model,
it is possible that the inferences drawn from their analysis do not hold
up to scrutiny and re-analysis. I then compared this to an analysis of
the data set but fitting the best-fit model according to the previous
relative fit test.

![](arbutus_results.png)

**Figure 3. P-value distributions for each of the six test statistics
when fitting data to the best fit model.** The test statistics, besides
m.sig, display a uniform distribution of p-values. This suggests that
the data is adequately explained by the corresponding model. S.hgt shows
a low amount of p-values near the lower end of values.

Interestingly, when fitting the best available model to each gene, the
models used were adequate across the board, as shown by the flat
distribution of p-values. Notably, the s.hgt test statistic shows a low
amount of p-values near the low end. This is likely caused by many of
the genes having NA values for this test statistic. This means that the
re-scaled tree for each of these genes has a conal shape, i.e., there
was no phylogenetic signal for these genes when the best-fit model is
used. The fact that this was not seen when fitting the BM model alone
suggests that other models (EB or OU) may be too stringent with
phylogenetic signal, or that the BM model is not stringent enough.
Further analysis is necessary to determine which of the two
possibilities explains this.

The authors of the paper also chose to exclude many of the genes that
did not meet the assumptions of the BM model, leaving a total of 648
genes left for analysis. The plot below shows the same process as above,
but for just those 648 genes. Additionally, I have calculated a standard
error for each gene across species and used that in the fit of each
model.

![](arbutus_only_BM_genes.png)

**Figure 4. P-value distributions for just the 648 genes that fit the
assumptions of the BM model when fit to a BM model.** The distribution
shows the same trend as Figure 2.

![](only_BM_allfit_AIC.png)

**Figure 5. Histogram showing the fit best-fit model for a
gene-phylogeny pair for just genes that fit the assumptions of BM.** The
trend is the same as Figure 1.

![](only_BM_allfit_arbutus_results.png)

**Figure 6. P-value distributions for just the 648 genes that fit the
assumptions of the BM model when fit to the best-fit model.** The trend
remains the same as in Figure 3, except for the coefficient of
variation, which accounts for rate variation across the phylogeny, which
actually shows a lower adequacy for this subset of the data.

As stated earlier, a set of the genes have low phylogenetic signal when
fitting the best-fit model, as shown by the genes that are missing
values for s.hgt. I then confirmed this was the case by performing a
phylogenetic signal hypothesis test. In this instance I used the
K-statistic randomization test first described by Blomberg et al. \[6\].
This test first creates a statistic that measures the adherence to a set
of continuous character data, K. The lower the K-value, the more
phylogenetic signal. The test then generates a P-value by comparing the
statistic to a random distribution of the character generated by BM
\[6\]. The null hypothesis of the test is that the sample does not
display phylogenetic signal, more specifically, that switching around
the order of tips does not affect the sample distribution. In essence,
the lower the p-value, the stronger the evidence of phylogenetic signal.

An analysis of just the genes that the original authors considered to be
fitting the assumptions of BM produced the following plot.

![](phylosig.png)

**Figure 7. Test statistics and P-values from a test of phylogenetic
signal.** Data was subset into “not\_NA”, or data that did have a
calculated s.hgt P-value and data that did not, “only\_NA”.

As shown in the plot above, genes that had NA as their s.hgt P-value had
higher P-values in this test, showing that these genes did indeed show
no phylogenetic signal. I then performed this same analysis on the
entire data set to see if this pattern was unique to just genes that had
been identified as following the assumptions of BM, or if this pattern
could be generalized.

## References

1.  Cope, A. L.; O’Meara, B. C.; Gilchrist, M. A. Gene Expression of
    Functionally-Related Genes Coevolves across Fungal Species:
    Detecting Coevolution of Gene Expression Using Phylogenetic
    Comparative Methods. *BMC Genomics* **2020**, *21* (1), 370.
    <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-6761-3.>
2.  Akaike, H.; Petrov, B. N.; Csaki, F. *Second International Symposium
    on Information Theory*; Akademia Kiado, 1973.
3.  Simpson, G. G. *Tempo and Mode in Evolution*; Columbia Univ. Press:
    New York, 1944.
4.  Hansen, T. F. Stabilizing Selection and the Comparative Analysis of
    Adaptation. *Evolution* **1997**, *51* (5), 1341–1351.
    <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.1997.tb01457.x.>
5.  Pennell, M. W.; FitzJohn, R. G.; Cornwell, W. K.; Harmon, L. J.
    Model Adequacy and the Macroevolution of Angiosperm Functional
    Traits. *The American Naturalist* **2015**, *186* (2), E33–E50.
    <https://doi.org/10.1086/682022.>
